I recently wrote an article expressing my concerns about the methods the software industry provides for training and preparing new software developers for proficiency in their professional work.  It seems that I failed to adequately articulate my point, because a great number of people immediately responded with arguments both for and against four-year computer science degrees vs. self-directed learning or accelerated software development programs.  To quote from my original article:

> Four-year computer science degrees have not provided the needed skills; many successful developers have degrees in unrelated subjects, or none at all.

I think this should make it clear that I was not arguing that a four-year degree is a necessity for someone who wishes to become a professional software developer.  However, to be clear, my argument was not that four-year degrees have no value, or are not an appropriate introduction to a career in software.  The value, and expense, of a college education is a fascinating subject, on which much has been written by many people with much more experience in, and knowledge of, higher education than I have.  I have my opinions on the subject, but my goal was not to engage in this particular debate.

Again, to quote from my original article:

> The question is not how existing courses of study fail to provide value, but how proficient developers actually *do* learn their skills.

And:

> The real question is how to provide a path from that open door [into software] to productivity and success. Many professions consider education programs - whether they result in a degree, a certificate, or a license - to be just the first step, followed by significant time doing real work, with dedicated supervision, and increasing autonomy based on performance. 

My goal for the original article was not to engage in the existing debate over the relative value of different programs for introducing new developers into the software industry, but how to maintain and accelerate their growth from beginner developers to effectiveness and productivity.

It seems that Avi Flombaum agrees with me that we need this; from his original interview, which I quoted in my original article:

> *Avi*: Day 1, [Flation School students] start building something. After that, they're a developer, **they may not be any good**, but what else does being a developer mean besides building things? ...**To become a great developer, that takes years**.

So, Avi believes that developers are initially not very good, and reaching their full potential takes years; this is exactly my point.  Imagine if we could shorten the time it takes a developer to reach their potential; if we could shave just one year off the learning curve from "not very good" developer to "great" developer; if we could limit the mistakes or inefficiency their inexperience can cause during their years of growth.  From carpentry apprenticeships to medical residency, mature professions have historically placed great value on the inexperienced learning from the experienced, doing real work with real clients.  The classroom prepares them for that experience, but it cannot replace that experience.

Unfortunately, few, if any, software companies currently provide this type of mentorship.  One reason is obvious: it has a high short-term cost.  Businesses need their experienced developers building product, and time spent mentoring inexperienced developers takes away from that.  Unfortunately, a focus on short-term success causes long-term pain.  As inexperienced developers struggle to learn on their own, or with limited mentorship, and the demand for developers rapidly grows, the supply of experienced developers shrinks in comparison to demand.  Businesses thus have even more need for their limited supply of experienced developers to focus on building product, and the problem compounds.

In addition, a more subtle factor contributes to the lack of effective mentorship.  The software industry has consistently valued highly technical and analytical thinking skills above all else.  Microsoft and Google have famously popularized problem-solving interview questions, which many companies now emulate.  But, an effective mentor needs these skills and more, a set of skills that software companies rarely or never select for: patience, empathy, and communication.  I have worked for many software companies, and interviewed at even more, but I have never had an interviewer ask me to explain a solution to a problem in four different ways, reflecting four different learning styles.  The unfortunate fact is that many senior software developers do not have the traits to act as an effective mentor, and many more simply wouldn't want to.

In a response to my original article Avi Flombaum suggests that Pivotal Labs should hire beginner developers and train them.  Pivotal has some of the best software developers, and best mentors, that I have had the opportunity to work with.  However, Pivotal's business is high-end consulting; they provide a premium service for their clients, and their rates reflect that.  Suggesting that Pivotal should hire beginner developers is akin to suggesting that the Mayo Clinic should hire classes of third-year medical students because it would be a great learning experience.  I'm sure the Mayo Clinic provides training opportunities, just as Pivotal provides a limited number of internships, but it is not their focus.

As it happens, I no longer work for Pivotal Labs, and haven't for well over a year.  In fact, I currently work for Orchard (http://www.orchardpie.com), where my goal is precisely to help solve the mentorship problem.  If Pivotal Labs is the Mayo Clinic, Orchard will be the Bellevue or Beth Israel Deaconess of software: an institution focused both on providing exceptional service **and** a learning environment where promising new developers can gain experience, learn from experienced mentors, and rapidly reach their potential while doing real work on real products for real clients with real challenges.

The benefits of the public teaching hospital model don't end at the mentee.  For senior software developers I hope to offer a new dimension of career growth in a profession that has historically struggled with limited career paths.  The software industry has historically not valued or rewarded the traits required for teaching and mentorship, but Orchard does and will.  Just as public teaching hospitals traditionally provide healthcare to the most underserved patients, I hope Orchard will provide services for businesses that suffer most from the growing need for experienced developers: startups, non-profits, and foundations, especially those building products to support the infrastructure of our society (education, healthcare, children's services, law enforcement, etc.) but that will never go viral or catch the interest of venture capitalists.

Do you think you have what it takes to help someone realize their talent?  Do you feel frustrated when you have a question and no one is available or willing to help you?  Do you have a product that you just can't seem to find, or afford, a technical team for?  Please contact me at adam@orchardpie.com, and we'll become part of the solution together.

